In the upcoming lecture we’re going to begin to explore chemical reactions. During a chemical 
reaction bonds and lone pairs are reapportioned among the substances involved in the reaction. In 
order words, bonds are broken and formed during reactions, and electrons are rearranged among 
the structures of the reactants. 

Mass is conserved during chemical reactions, meaning that no matter is created or destroyed 
during the reaction. The identities of all atoms involved remain the same (i.e., the nuclei do not 
change during a chemical reaction). Therefore, the number of atoms of each element involved in 
the reaction must be equal in both the products and reactants.  

Chemical reactions can be described using a reaction equation like the one presented on the slide. 
The reaction equation identifies the reactants (on the left side of the arrow) and the products of 
the reaction (on the right side of the arrow). Each molecular formula in the reaction equation is 
preceded by a coefficient that identifies the number of moles of each substance that are involved 
in the reaction. For example, the combustion of ethane involves the reaction of two moles of 
ethane (C2H6) with seven moles of oxygen to produce four moles of carbon dioxide and six moles 
of water, as shown in the reaction equation on the slide. If no coefficient is shown in front of a 
molecular formula then the coefficient is assumed to be one. This equation is said to be balanced
because the same number of each type of element appears on both sides of the reaction equation. 
Notice that there are 4 carbon atoms, 12 hydrogen atoms, and 14 oxygen atoms on both the 
reactant (left) and product (right) sides of the reaction equation. 

1

As we will see in class, some reactions are driven by the formation of a solid precipitate from a solution. In
order to determine which substances will precipitate we need to be familiar with the solubility trends for 
common ionic substances. Substances that are soluble in water will not form precipitates, whereas 
substances that are insoluble will form precipitates. 

+, Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, or Cs+ will always be soluble, with no exceptions 
-), 

The top part of the chart on this slide describes substances that are soluble, along with a few exceptions. 
Ionic compounds in which the cation is NH4
(i.e., the identity of the anion doesn’t matter). Similarly, ionic compounds in which the anion is nitrate (NO3
-), or acetate (CH3COO-) will always be soluble, with no exceptions (i.e., the identity of the 
perchlorate (ClO4
cation doesn’t matter). These soluble anions and cations share the common property that they are relatively 
large and singly charged and, as you would expect from Coulomb’s law, only form weak interactions with any 
counter ion. Ionic compounds in which the anion is chloride (Cl-), bromide (Br-), or iodide (I-) are soluble 
2+), silver (Ag+), or lead (Pb2+). For example, aluminum chloride (AlCl3) 
unless the cation is mercury(I) (Hg2
would be soluble, but silver chloride (AgCl) would not be soluble. Ionic compounds in which the anion is 
sulfate (SO4

2-) are usually soluble unless the cation is Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+, Hg2

2+, Ag+, or Pb2+. 

The bottom part of the chart on this slide describes substances that are insoluble, along with a few 
exceptions. Ionic compounds in which the anion is carbonate (CO3
the cation is one of those we listed earlier whose salts are always soluble (NH4
compounds in which the anion is hydroxide (OH-) or sulfide (S2-) are also insoluble unless the cation is NH4
Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cs+, Ca2+, Sr2+, or Ba2+ (the “always soluble” cations we listed earlier, plus a couple more). 

3-) are insoluble unless 
+, Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, or Cs+). Ionic 

2-) or phosphate (PO4

+, 

If two solutions are mixed together that contain an insoluble cation/anion pair, then the pair of ions will react 
and form an ionic solid that will precipitate from the solution. For example, If a solution of ammonium sulfate 
is mixed with a solution of barium chloride, the barium ions and sulfate ions will react to form solid barium 
sulfate. Ammonium chloride, however, is soluble, so the ammonium and chloride ions would not form a 
precipitate and would instead remained dissolved in the solution as spectator ions. 

2

