We have already seen that dissolution can occur when a solid solute is combined with
a solvent. The reverse of this process, the precipitation of a crystalline solid from a
solution, can occur as well.

Imagine a scenario in which a very large amount of salt is added to a small quantity of
solvent. Initially the rate of dissolution will be much faster than the rate of
crystallization since the solvent initially contains no solute that can crystallize. As
more solute dissolves, the concentration of solute in the solution increases, thus
increasing the rate of crystallization as well. Eventually the solute concentration will
reach a point where the rate of crystallization equals the rate of dissolution (i.e., a
state of dynamic equilibrium). At that point, there will no longer be anymore net
dissolution of the solute. This maximum solute concentration, at which the rates of
dissolution and crystallization are equal, is known as the solubility of the solute.

The solubility of a solute is the maximum amount in grams or moles of a solute that
can dissolve in a specific volume of solvent under a specific set of conditions. A
solute’s solubility is influenced by the types of IMFs the solute forms with itself and
with the solvent. Solubility is also affected by temperature and can increase or
decrease with temperature depending on the salt and solvent.. The solubility of gases
is affected by pressure as well.




                                                                                           1
The terms unsaturated, saturated, and supersaturated are used to describe how much solute is
dissolved in a solution relative to the solubility of the solute under those conditions.

Unsaturated solutions contain less solute than is soluble under a given set of conditions. For
example, the solubility of NaCl in water is 36 g per 100 g of water at room temperature. Thus, 30
g of NaCl will dissolve completely in 100 g of water. The resulting solution will contain less solute
than is soluble under those conditions (30 g versus 36 g), meaning that the solution is
unsaturated.

Saturated solutions contain the maximum amount of solute that is soluble under a given set of
conditions. For example, if 40 g of NaCl is combined with 100 g of water at room temperature,
only 36 g of the NaCl will dissolve since the solubility of NaCl in water is 36 g per 100 g of water
this temperature. The remaining 4 g of NaCl will remain as a solid at the bottom of the solution.
The resulting solution is said to be saturated since it contains the maximum amount of solute that
is soluble under those conditions (36 g).

Supersaturated solutions contain more dissolved soluble than is soluble under those conditions.
These solutions are unstable, and given the opportunity, the excess solute will precipitate from
the solution. Supersaturated solutions are typically created by changes in pressure or temperature
that lower the solubility of a solute, such as cooling the sample. For example, at 100°C 39 g of
NaCl can dissolve in 100 g of water. If a saturated solution of NaCl is prepared at 100°C and then
cooled to room temperature (where NaCl is less solubility), the solution will be supersaturated, at
least until some of the dissolved solute precipitates from the solution.


                                                                                                        2
