--- page 1 ---
The solubility of a gas in a solution is affected by the pressure. Pressure does not, however, affect 
the solubility of liquids and solids in solutions. 
The solubility of a dissolved gas is proportional to the partial pressure of that gas ( Pg) above the 
solution. This relationship is known as Henry’s Law, which is shown on the slide as Cg=k∙Pg, where 
Cgis the concentration (i.e., solubility) of a gas (“g” is the identity of the gas), Pgis the partial 
pressure of the gas, and k is the proportionality constant. The proportionality constant (k) varies 
from one gas to the next, and its value is related to the strength of IMFs that the gas can form with 
the solvent. Gases that form stronger IMFs with water will have larger Henry’s law constants, thus 
larger amounts of these gases will dissolve at a fixed partial pressure compared to weak IMF gases. 
In other words gases with stronger IMFs will be more soluble in water. This is shown by the graph 
on the bottom left of the slide. The graph plots solubility versus partial pressure of the gas, with 
each line representing a different gas. The slope of the line, which equals the Henry’s law constant, 
is larger for gases that form stronger IMFs. 
Henry’s law explains why carbonated beverages release large amounts of gas when they’re 
opened. These beverages are packaged with pressurized carbon dioxide, with a typical can of soda 
having an airspace consisting of CO2at a partial pressure of 1.5 -2.0 atm. Under this high partial 
pressure, the CO2is quite soluble in the beverage. When the soda is opened, however, the airspace 
in the can (which was previously pressurized CO2) is replaced with air at about 1 atm total pressure. 
Air only contains a tiny amount of CO2, so the partial pressure of CO2goes from 1.5 -2.0 atm to 
nearly zero. As such, the solubility of CO2in the soda decreases precipitously upon opening, 
resulting in a supersaturated solution. Since CO2is supersaturated in the opened soda we observe 
a net movement (in the form of bubbles and fizz) of gas out of the beverage. 
1
